Morning, welcome.
Yeah,
We coming in bright and early.
Um, we've got, uh, roughly, roughly 60 minutes, um,
you this morning, maybe slightly less, um, just
to give a grab, a long-term insights briefing.
So, um, when you're ready, time is awesome.
Thank you Chair and the committee members
for your time this morning.
And today from the ministry.
I'm joined with my learned colleagues
to have this corridor all
around the long-term insights briefing that is before you.
To my right, I had Brendan and Andre,
and to my left is Lauren, who's the project lead
for Long-Term Insights Briefing.
And the, the, the four of us will reflect
and provide some insights, uh, in relation
to our discussions this morning.
Our long-term insights briefing is focused on culture
in the digital age.
This is a broad think piece that navigates
the profound changes that digital technology brings
to our cultural landscape.
By 2040, our cultural sectors will experience deep
interconnectivity with AI
and other emerging technologies, technologies
that may be familiar, that we may be familiar
with generative AI software, robotics,
blockchain technology, or have already evolved
and developed some technologies we haven't even conceived of
yet, uh, will be changing our sectors.
When we published the first T TIP in 20, in early 2023,
generative AI had only just emerged
while writing the T tip, it was hard to keep up
with the pace of change.
Uh, there were so many advancements, like for example,
the release of open AI's first agent operator in Jan 2025
in China's first game of soccer using autonomous robots
in June of 2025.
Now, if you get a chance, Mr.
Chair and committing members have a laugh at that.
These advancements will continue to offer opportunities
for creating, sharing
and pro protecting stories that are unique
to our culture and heritage.
If we look at the great work that Teq Media, for example,
whose pioneering a AI not language work, has helped
to advance to real revitalization
and preserving oral histories.
Whilst there are great opportunities,
there are also significant ethical, legal, cultural
and governance questions.
For example, the TIB talks about a range of issues relating
to online harm, including use of algorithms,
synthetic content, synthetic content,
deep fakes and misinformation.
We've already recently seen that folks of the face, the fake
Facebook posts shared on, um, sharing AI generated images
of children after the Mount Landslide as an example.
We must address these issues thoughtfully and collectively.
The is a base for us to keep a step out
of the week till week issues out of the month
to month issues, but allow us to think longer term, decades,
generations, even.
This is not the current government policy thinking on ai.
Instead, it's a snapshot
of a collective exploration across our cultural system of
what the future may hold.
We spoke to a lot of people in writing this out to,
and I do want to acknowledge all the funded entities within
the vote experts, creative practitioners,
and everyone who have been able and who have been able
and so generous with their time, experiences,
and insights to help us develop the out to, uh,
we are a small but lean agency, uh, with a mix of levers
and a sector stewardship approach.
I really do want to acknowledge our crowdfunded entities
who played an important role in mapping out our future.
The methodology was that we, through combination
of interviews, workshops, written submissions
and conversations engaged with over a hundred people on the,
and we saw and heard firsthand
how polarizing the issues arising from emerging digital
technology can be, particularly in this generative AI space.
We heard the risks and opportunities of emerging technology
and the competing priorities across commercial
and public spheres.
We as decision makers will always have
to navigate these tensions and trade offs.
This is probably the critical part of the t
and allows a framework for us
to have these important conversations.
There are many examples around this tension.
AI is scraping huge volumes of cultural
and creative content, including New Zealand music, images,
stories, design media
and heritage material to train AI systems.
This scraping is often done without permission
or compensation.
This is an issue being faced globally.
So we are monitoring developments
that are happening globally
and here at home
to consider the implications on our cultural systems.
This includes staying in touch with our counterparts at MB
who are leading the review of the Copyright Act.
While the digital future is an era of interest for everyone,
we all have our reckons.
There are such diverse perspectives on
how people within the different sectors view
emerging technologies.
We know that the use of AI assisted tools varies quite a bit
between sectors,
and this is influenced by many factors
including digital access and skills
and the nature of the work being undertaken.
And there's a wide, and there is such a wide ranging
applications for emerging digital technology in our sectors.
From creating and editing audio visual content
to transcription and captioning
to interactive digital cultural experiences
to global distribution.
It is exciting to see how New Zealand creatives
and communities are harnessing the new technology
to innovate, to preserve our culture
and history for future generations.
How does the outer impact on the way the ministry
thinks and the sectors insights provide an evidence base
to support our sectors to be sustainable and resilient
and to adapt to the digital future?
The insights within the alt tip align
with our government's recent strategy for ai,
which emphasizes AI adoption
and application with a focus on leveraging AI science,
innovation and technology strengths.
It also aligns with the government,
Digi government chief digital officer's work
on digitizing government and responsible AI adoption.
There are examples also under amplify New Zealand's creative
and cultural strategy that delve into these issues.
We also utilize futures thinking, which is a tool
that we will, as a ministry continue to use
around our thinking in the cultural sectors.
So that's a brief overview, insights into the tib,
and we, my colleagues here, look forward
to future conversation with you now.
Thank you. Thank
You very much. Um, first
question, morning, uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, firstly, congratulations on a huge piece of work.
I can imagine how long
and, um, how much has been involved in pulling it together.
Um, I guess, um, the next step is, um, is
where my question's heading.
So a lot of it is dependent on a whole lot
of other things happening.
So how do you envisage, um, lining all of those ducks up
to get it to work?
I mean, it's, it's with all things that we do
as a small ministry
or lean ministries, how do we leverage the whole system,
the whole sector to make sure that everything is considered?
And when I think of how we even look at this piece of work,
having the framing of create, um, share, protect,
and then the approach around what are the insights,
what are the drivers, um, we did this in consultation with,
with a whole heap of people that hopefully
through the process of thinking can provide a framework
where we can line things up.
Um, one of the issues that we are trying to line up to is
around, um, copyright, um, connecting in closely
with MB and the work that they're doing.
Um, so there is a whole a system approach that we're trying
to, to develop here.
Um, we do have an all of government approach to this too,
with the work that the GCDO, uh, are implementing.
So it is a difficult thing to try
and get everything lined up.
Um, um, but it's, it's something that we're willing
and we're going to have to, to do because whether we like it
or not, um,
the waivers here was already gone over us, or it's already gone.
That's right. Yeah. And, um,
and the approach that we are taking is that with
what we can control, this is our thinking to date.
We've got good thinking from the sector.
We've got great thinking that's happened with, with various,
um, government, um, agencies to try
and, you know, allow us to ride this wave
of digital technology and, and,
and, uh, artificial intelligence.
And I think that's the balance too, is
how do we take advantage
of the opportunities while also looking at the,
the great risks that come through this.
Um, sorry.
So I was just gonna say, I, I mean, I think,
I think the important thing here is that this is a product
that's, that's very much created with the creative sector.
And, um, there's an element of, you know,
government's role in this, but actually they're way ahead
of, of government on all sorts of things way ahead of us.
You know, you, you, you go into this and,
and I, I expected
to hear people being worried about technology,
about ai, about those sorts of things.
And you know, certainly some are they worried about the
ethical issues, they're worried about the,
what it'll do to their livelihoods.
They're worried about what it's gonna do to creativity,
but they're also very excited.
And so you are hearing across the creative sectors
and you're seeing these examples of use,
we talked about media, others where, um, they're,
they're really moving ahead.
So the question for us is we have a role,
but actually New Zealand's got a long history of innovating,
um, particularly when it comes to technology.
So there's a, there is a lot of, you know, making sure
that we don't get in the way as well as supporting them to,
you know, to progress what they want to achieve.
Okay. So in the context of digitizing government, is that
where you see this kind of strategy leading?
I I'm, I'm just trying to get in my head
where it fits in the system
and then how, how are we gonna get it there?
Um, you know, it's all very well that you,
you've got this piece of work, but how do you unsell it
and make it fit within the call of the big machine?
I mean, that's the ongoing conversation when we've
completed the long-term insights briefing.
We all have our, um, important networks that we have
to connect them with me, with all
of my chief executive colleagues, the work that, um,
my colleague Paul James is doing with the,
the Government Chief Digital Office in the work
that's being done there, and how we,
how this can influence that work.
It's not so much overtaking the work that they're doing,
but we provide a real strong cultural lens
and the impact on the culture that can help
and inform the work that, that Paula is, is doing with GTC
before it moves over to the Public Service Commission.
I, I've got a couple of questions on,
uh, fascinating presentation.
And it's, uh, f*****g a good point.
I think the wave has already gone over us, um,
and, uh, in, in many cases people trying
to figure out how to mm-hmm.
How to, how to deal with the wake and it's gone past 'em.
Um, but the just, uh,
f my first question is just interested in the, the, um,
your own use of artificial intelligence tools
to draft aspects of this presentation
and in line with the, um, government chief digital officers,
responsible AI governance and public service.
Uh, and just, just be interested in, gives a bit
of an insight into how that process is working for you,
what tools you're using, how you're finding it of value,
and, and any sticking points
To the question of, uh, the, the,
and then to the question of how we're using within agency.
I'll, I can talk to that. Alright. You
Sure. I'm happy to speak to
the L process.
Um, so we used AI quite, uh, selectively
and deliberately in some cases, uh, to support the work
and also test its capability.
So as you'll have seen in the document,
we did quite an extensive literature review of New Zealand
and international research,
and we used AI in addition to the traditional ways
that we would go about, uh, identifying sources
to see if it would uncover anything that we didn't.
So in that horizon scanning exercise, um, we also used it,
um, to develop the images that were in our future scenario,
which is an annex three of the briefing.
Um, we wanted to see how, so we used Microsoft copilot
and we had developed the, the scenario text in consultation
with a lot of stakeholders of
what are the different features that could unfold for us.
And we gave the scenario text to copilot
and use it as a prompt
to imagine New Zealand in 2040 in that scenario.
And we wanted to see how it could creatively imagine things
in ways that we couldn't.
Um, I think it's fair to say that the images that it came up
with, many of them were quite troubling and problematic,
and they had some hallucinations in there.
Um, we were quite careful about which ones ultimately made
it into the final briefing.
We learned that AI has some challenges in
representing cultures in ways that we are comfortable with
and that we feel are accurate
and support how we want to represent New Zealand.
Um, so it was definitely, uh, interesting
and thought provoking exercise.
It really uncovered a lot of those representational issues
that we talk about in web briefing
And within, within the ministry.
Um, it, it, it, like, again, it's, it's that wave
and taking opportunity around efficiency, um, speed,
um, and then just having the, the knowledge
to then QA whatever comes out, you know, be mindful
of hallucinations and stuff like that.
But in terms of AI use,
we have an AI policy within the ministry.
Um, we use a Microsoft co-pilot within the ministry also,
even though I know, I know many
of us have our own individual preferences around AI tools,
um, and figure out a way
of using it without it getting caught up in the,
in the sy in the system.
And, um, so we align the work that we do around
and how we use AI within the organization
with the principles around, um, responsible use of ai.
Um, so that, that, that, that's, yeah. Thank you.
I was just gonna say, I think there's an element that,
you know, part of the challenge is, you know,
that really great tool, the, you know, generative AI
and can do a lot of things.
Um, obviously we've gotta check it
for hallucinations and that sort of thing.
I think we've all been embarrassing situations
where we've relied on it and it turned out, um, not
to be accurate, um,
but one of the things you can't do is you can't then
outsource all your thinking to an ai, get 'em
to write your papers, do that thing,
and get your AI to show up in a select committee,
for example, and then talk to you people.
So, um, there, there's, there, there, there's a,
there's the work to make sure that you're not actually just
training people to, to prompt and
therefore not being able to do the thinking
themselves or justify themselves.
So that, that, that's the balance
and, you know, it's an iterative process is with anything.
What, what do you think from the creative sector
and how they're managing this intersection or,
or of trying to work out this intersection between, between
the, the human capability and sort of, uh, I guess strengths
and, and what AI does?
Because AI is
increasingly reaching into the creative sector.
Yes. Yeah. Image generation,
but, um, you know, video create some pretty incredible
videos, uh, poetry, music mm-hmm.
You name it. And how, how is the creative sector working in
that intersection that you're saying New Zealand?
It's, it's a really, you know,
like it's a real fine balance for them.
And, um, say for instance, like New Zealand or near
and their funding applications and that, that approach
and, you know, they, uh, identifying,
like making sure applicants
and any information that's being presented has, you know,
they earmark whether they use AI or, or, or not.
Um, we know that within the screen sector, you know,
there's a lot of, um, potential work that's not being lost,
but they have to adapt as there's better ways or, uh,
or quicker ways of getting work done.
Um, so there's the tension
that the opportunity versus the risks
that come from, from all of this work.
So when we did the conversations with,
with the cultural sector, they were leading a lot
of the conversations
because they're actually at the forefront of applying, um,
what they're learning and how they're learning
and the risks that they're facing is that,
that they're navigating the same world.
Yeah. And if I could just add to that, I, you know,
I think it's important to acknowledge that our cultural
and creative sectors have been using digital,
digital technology as
that has developed for quite some time.
I mean, that's essentially the entire
history of the screen sector.
So it's really thinking through
what are the new applications
and how can that enhance the work already
happening in those spaces.
One of the challenges though that we did here was
around the shifting skills
that early career professionals may need to be adapting
as they come into the workplace.
So we know that a lot of the tools that, uh, are, are tasks
that are being undertaken by, um, AI assisted tools are some
of those early entry tools, the things that you can automate
and, and are perhaps require less critical thinking skills,
whereas a lot of those real creative decision making skills
that the human value of
that human creativity has not dissipated yet.
So, um, it's important for us to be thinking about
how we can upskill
and train our early career professionals to adapt to
that changing environment.
Well, I ask one last question.
I've got a bunch of other questions I need to hand hand over
to, um, but just, um, digital sovereignty, there's
that in paper
and, um, obviously these digital, well,
the AI tools have been developed in the companies overseas,
and that's that they're leading it
and we'll continue to lead, uh,
the massive investments that have been put into them.
What, if anything, can New Zealand do or,
or think about in terms of, uh, digital sovereignty
around this creative space?
And, and probably fast moving
and highly competitive, uh, sector,
which is accelerating a pace.
We have the privilege of connecting in with the global,
uh, governance arrangements.
We look at what the UK are doing, what the US are doing.
So we are kind of like earlier adopters or,
or well, um, is not the right term,
but we're learning, um, observing, uh,
and then responding as best as we can.
You're right, you know, um, these are large platforms
that are, you know, way ahead or, or in front of us, um,
but we are seeing from our colleagues overseas.
Um, I know Andre, did you want
to just touch on what's happening globally
in, in that, that, that,
Sure. Yeah. Uh,
sovereign AI is a really interesting development,
uh, and we're seeing it emerging in places, uh, like Europe
and Canada as well has, um, sort of begun
to first steps in developing their own sovereign ai,
which they call sovereign Sovereign Compute.
Uh, first the first step is getting
that digital infrastructure in place, like the,
the critical mass of data centers of, of getting your, uh,
your really, your GPUs Yeah.
Uh, uh, graphics processing units.
Um, someone figured out they basically can turn video cards
that people used to play video games into really, um,
high level, uh, high capacity, uh, data processing.
And that was used for, um, things like, uh, Bitcoin
and cryptocurrency and things like, you know,
folding proteins and scientific research.
Um, and that is the,
the really the foundational computer elements of, of ai.
Uh, but, but the eu, they, uh, actually leading,
I think in terms of building that sovereign AI capacity
in France with their Mistral project
and Germany with, uh, the Sophie project
and all of those, um, all of those initiatives are aligned
to the EU AI Act, which, uh,
establishes a regulator based out of the EU Commission.
Um, some risk ratings for things like biometric data,
personal data, anything to do with person's human rights,
uh, and then also some guidelines for member states
to transition into that EU AI Act framework.
Um, so, so the, the foundational step is getting that, um,
that critical mass of infrastructure first,
and then you build the AI model,
you train it on your own unique data,
and then at the end of the day, hopefully you have a,
a sovereign AI tool.
We're also seeing, um, there's, there's
that national level of a nationally sovereign system,
but there's also community level
where we're seeing a lot of developments.
There are groups, there's other Pacific nations
that are working to create kind of bespoke AI environments
where they can bring funds certain things
and choose what's shared, for example,
with large language models.
And that community empowerment, um,
aspect can go alongside those other more
large scale projects.
Um, I'd love to go more.
Well, um, thank you, uh, thank you for this.
Um, yeah, very comprehensive piece of work.
Um, I just had, um, a question,
perhaps a supplementary follow on from that.
My question is, uh, having completed this piece of work,
and, and I guess it, um, Anne was asking, um,
how does this change how you operate
and what you do, um, going forward in terms of a strategy,
uh, vision for the future, uh, in your own,
um, you know, work?
How, how does it alter what you do?
It's, um, challenged our thinking
around particular the strategic futures piece
and the insights piece is definitely something
that we would consider when we get
to renew our strategic contentions.
Um, but it would, you know, it really did
help provide a really good framing
to talk about this really good topic.
And so then, um, when you look at what we learned
through this, there is definitely ways
that we can improve on our strategic outlook based on the,
the, the strategic futures thinking that help us inform
the long-term insights briefing.
Uh, uh, and,
and so how is it then, um, uh, uh,
because there are a number of, uh, in here, a number
of options, uh, and a number of a large
Number of 31 options. Yes. And
They are insights comprehensive, and I look at them
and I kind of real with acy of what we're facing,
And, and we were more what they want,
we were more, we had to whittle it.
Yes, I'm sure. Um, but how do you prioritize those
and how do you say, okay, well we can achieve these five,
um, and these are the priorities, and
and what would they be if you had to choose?
I mean, again, this is the conversation,
ongoing conversation with the sector,
with our government partners, what we learn and see
and hear from what's happening globally.
And we're not on, on our own in this space.
China, um, ride this wave, I wouldn't, I use the wrong term,
wash over us, and I should say we're standing
and riding the wave of this.
And so that will have to, it is kind of iterative, um,
working with the 31 options
that have been presented at the create, um,
sharing and protect.
Um, so I mean, that's not an answer, but it is an answer
because it is quite, um, it's not prescriptive,
it's not linear, it's quite, um, yeah,
we just gotta role and play as we, as we go.
And what are the, what is really critical
to the, to the sector?
And I think it's important to remember that, you know,
the long-term insights briefing is designed
for the next 15 plus years.
So it's a, it's a range of options.
So as the future unfolds
and we don't know, you know, what's gonna happen next year
or 10 years from now in this space with certainty.
So it presents those options for us to decide
what we are facing those situations,
or hopefully in advance of facing those situations.
What are some tools that we could have?
What are the tools for us? What are the tools
to empower our communities to be able
to act responsibly in this space?
What are the tools for our sectors to be able to innovate
and create and continue to, to thrive?
Uh, just one last sentiment.
And so how long before we can see some of
that materially? I you back,
I mean, yeah.
I'm not sure is the short answer.
Um, it, it just shifts
and changes significantly every area.
Um, yeah. Sorry, do you mean in
Terms of, of specific options? Well,
I mean, you know, it, it's wonderful to have all
of the options is wonderful to have all
of this work and to have done it.
And it's fabulous. And don't get me wrong,
because I can, I can see how difficult
and challenging it is to get to this point.
Yeah. But if it's just another document, um, you know,
when does the rubber hit the road
and when can we see some actual movement
and how departments operate
or how government agencies operate in this world.
So the other thing is that, that the, the, the idea
of the alt is, is, is a, it is a bit of a think piece,
but it also informs the thinking.
Now, some of these might be, um, proposals that we would put
to ministers and say, Hey, we think this has got legs.
You might wanna have a look at it.
Um, so there's, there's, part
of it is about informing our ability to inform and advise.
Um, it's not a, this is what we're gonna do.
And in fact, some of these are things
that don't fit the current environment at all,
but they might be things that, you know,
if the world changes in the ways that some
of these scenarios play out, you know,
if they play out the way we think they are,
we might end up there and therefore that's a bigger option.
So, um, we, we've been here, we've had to be careful
with the alter because it isn't, this is
what the government policy should be.
It is a collective, um, think piece about from the sector
as well as from us about
what some potential options should be, both
to inform your good selves, the public,
and then we can use those when we are advising ministers on
what they might want to progress.
Excellent. Alright, well, um, Kerry, we've got, um,
questions on basically everyone.
So I'll just say next is Helen Pat.
Uh, look, I've, like, I had one question. I've now got
25, So I'm gonna gonna pick one.
I, it's an, it's a, it's a fascinating
but also overwhelming area.
Uh, and it's happening so fast,
and I can see that there's a whole lot of material in here.
I should click further and I can do that.
But you've got those, um, strategies on blockchain in, uh,
Germany, and you've got Estonia looks like it's doing stuff,
which looks almost like one step beyond that
where it is creating a system.
Um, I, I'd love to know whether you are looking
for leadership in this area
that is more comprehensive from Parliament.
So for example, look, Australia has an ease safety officer.
This, um, this whole area, look
to me like it's gonna need kickass leadership
in terms of the new technology that filters out to you
and allows you to do these things rather than
every department or every area.
This is a great lens, but it just seems to me maybe we need
to think more systemically about a huge challenge.
Can I, that's a huge question,
and I'm not sure it's in your brief.
I mean, um, this is probably where we lean on the work
that GCDO is leading out on, on all of this.
Yes. And then the priorities that they see,
because they look after the whole system.
Now it's shifting from DIA over
to the public Service Commission, I think
by April of this year.
Yeah. And so there's a more centralized approach to
how we do, uh, digital technology, ai, the impact,
the risks, the opportunities.
Just hearkening back to what we said originally,
that the long term insight briefing here is just this is our
reckons based on these different threats.
Yeah. So something like that blockchain issue Yes.
And how dependent we are on that.
Are you saying don't worry,
it's all under control? Some people
On that No, no, no, no.
I, I'm saying that within the remit of, of of
what we can control.
Yeah. Uh, and, and what we have line sites from the system,
the GCDO is, is leading on, on all of that work.
Now, there are different agencies
that do doing different parts that impact on that,
like I mentioned earlier around the copyright Yes.
Act and, and the work that's being done out at, out at enb.
And, and again, there are observations that we have
around what's happening globally
and Germany being an example of that.
Uh, Estonia being another, there's some cool things
that are happening out of Singapore
also that we're looking into.
So we do do some stuff. But the
Mainly So you're figuring your things into the right
places, what you're telling me that's correct.
There is a good line of communication. Yes. Okay.
The question is actually beyond your I and I. Yeah.
It's something I have to think about that.
I mean, I think there's, there's so many elements of,
you know, there, there's leadership across, you know,
digitization of government AI strategy, so that the, um,
the government is leading out on this.
Mm-hmm. And then it's incumbent on us as public servants
to both support that direction
and also make sure that we are working well and
Cultural issues are Yeah. So
That we are not siloed. And,
you know, this is our bit about the cultural sector
and then there copyright over there
and the, so, so that, that is part, part
of this has been really helpful in understanding all the
different even parts Yeah.
Across government and then not across government, so
that we can support, um, thank you government's role.
Thank. Next question, Jan.
Oh, Kiara. Kiara, lovely to see you.
Um, and thank you for this.
It's been absolutely fascinating. As everyone said.
I want to go back to something that you touched,
you touched on Lauren before about the, um,
impact on the workforce
and the retraining, et cetera, that's needed.
I appreciate that. This is a long term insights briefing
with the emphasis on the long term,
but it seems to me that the disruption is happening right
now to the workforce.
'cause I think in the last week I may have read three
or four articles about the creative workforce
and the impact that AI has had on them.
How, and I appreciate it's an all a
government response here that's needed.
But how are you having the impact
and the emphasis onto ensuring
that our tertiary providers are
being responsive to that now?
Because being long term,
that's too late mm-hmm.
When needing to see the changes for them
and being someone that knows the education sector,
I also know that they're been slow to change in the past.
So, uh, what are you doing?
How are you having assurance, giving assurance that
that is changing fast?
Sure. Um, I think, um, Lama can speak to the work
of the ministry under Amplify.
Um, but just to speak to the insight side
of things in the first instance, yeah.
It was, it was important to us to capture the real risks
and harms that our creatives are
experiencing in the present day.
Even though this is a long-term insights briefing, we know
that over 80% of music creators in Australia, New Zealand,
for example, are worried about their livelihoods due to ai.
And we see this in any big period
of technological transformation.
As roles shift in the requirements of those roles shift,
I think it's important to acknowledge
that education happens in a lot of different places.
And yes, obviously we need our tertiary institutions
and our training institutions, um, to provide that.
The on the job training is also a big aspect to that.
And, and making sure that our, um, industry partners
and sectors can respond to providing that hands-on training.
And then also there's that digital literacy component
because we know that the vast majority of
what our kids are learning doesn't come from school.
And it, it hopefully will come
partially from us, but not always.
So making sure that our youth have the skills
to engage effectively with technology, to be able to do
that in a responsible way, in a way
where they can develop the skills that will be needed
for the future, is, in my view, as important
as ensuring our education students can support alongside
those other forms of, of how they're acquiring information.
Late last year, just coming back to Amplify,
amplify is the cultural New Zealand's
cultural creative strategy.
And we've got, um, actions out of that that informs,
and it will influence how government responds.
So when you look at the actions action 2.2,
we haven't ensure the treasury education system
and our job training, uh, meeting industry skills
that can support the sector's
contribution to economic growth.
So this was signed out by cabinet.
So it's an all a government approach,
and that's one area of focus.
'cause you're right, this is not a future
impact that's happening now.
And so that's part of the work that we're working
with the system to make sure, in terms of education,
it perhaps
Much more, but everybody does.
So I'll leave it there. That's great. Thank you.
One quick supplementary though on that is just what, um,
engagement or tools do you have to work with the Ministry
of Education, if any, to this thinking has been embedded
into their and now?
So, I mean, that's part of an ongoing conversation we are
having with them as they're working through.
I mean, there's a lot of change going on, obviously,
as you all know, and the education system.
Yeah. So part of that is feeding into things like
curriculum, things like, you know,
how do we make sure this is part of it?
And then just a broader influence campaign, if you will, uh,
to make sure that they're thinking about, um,
technology, ai.
I mean, obviously they are, but you know, there's a,
there's an element of, how do you think about it
for the creative sector? I was just
Gonna say with the creative Lens.
Yeah. We absolutely critical and,
and, you know, um, to Made does an excellent work recently
on the sort of flow from training into, um,
the creative sector and how a lot
of people don't actually come through the training.
You know, so how do you, how do you do you do
that outside of that system?
Um, and you know, so, so there's a,
there's a lot moving in that space.
And then it's the tertiary education that's the, you know,
primary and secondary, but it's also how do,
how do you train people outside of that?
How do you educate whether it's, um,
apprenticeships and things like that. Yeah. Yeah.
And even outside of just the formal infrastructure of,
of doing or influencing individuals, families,
communities are already in this space
thinking through this too.
There is, there is a divide.
There are some that have access and not,
and we've outlined it in the, so there's, it's a combination
of things that are happening
that we're seeing based on the feedback we got
through our consultation.
Thank you.
Thank you Chair.
Um, you opened your briefing
and referred to KU Media, which is, um,
so I've got a little question,
and it'll probably take me to the bigger questions.
Was there any, did you play any part, did your,
your team play any part in the development of Edia
and their work that they're doing?
No. No. So that's good.
Uh, I did, uh, 'cause I used to be on that board.
Um, I had, well, actually the smart ones,
they did all the work and we just smile while they were.
And so it's, and,
and one of the, one of the key that I know about
that whole project and where it's gone to is
that they controlled it themselves.
They didn't have any unnecessary interference from anybody.
And I think there's a, because the, the motive
behind it was about,
and so there's a direct feedback into our nation.
Mm-hmm. Nowhere else don't care
what else else is happening necessarily.
Mm-hmm. But say there's a, there's a element of control
and sovereign behavior and practice.
Right. And,
and I wonder about the maintenance of those things.
Um, when we start to, you, you know, when,
when I hear words like, like it
or not, not get in the way, wave, wake
and wash over, I don't like any of those words.
Uh, because our job is to, if we don't like it
or like it, then we will say so.
Mm-hmm. So that's our job, in my view.
And, um, and,
and it, it suggests nearly like it's already gone past us
and it might well have, uh, so, so,
and words like creative, generative, it, iterative, all of
that suggest it's, so
how do you monitor something that's moving so fast?
Genuinely not just saying as if, yes, no,
we're gonna monitor and we're gonna
speak to another a hundred people.
That, that's the size of this.
And what I've observed in the KU space, the size
of it suggests that, um, we may not have the capacity,
the capability to do that well.
So, um, I'm, I, I wanna make those points, um, um, Mr.
Chair. 'cause I, there's a healthy amount of distrust
around any of this, which I think is right,
which is why media took the stance
with this is our sovereign work, really,
and we will do it despite
what anyone else is doing or not doing.
How do you, and I mean, it's a long term briefing,
but how do you right now really mon monitor
and ensure that those we are as close to
keeping safe our products in, on our piece of fenra, um,
in this, in this AI space?
Um, I'm, yeah, I, I'm, um,
I'm concerned about that.
I mean, and I mean, I get excited too,
but that's not enough too.
Just keep rock on
and iterative sounds like a really healthy way to go.
So let's just keep going. Mm-hmm. That ain't it at all.
Mm-hmm. Um, iterative equals debate hard
and rigorous debate at our end.
Mm-hmm. And so I wanna, I wanna,
and again, our culture is not a peep show.
Mm-hmm. So, and if, and anything that we run must
and absolutely be designed, um, by us, for us,
for our whole nation.
So I wanna, these are the things.
I know it sounds like I might be like
bumming you out in this regard.
No. But I do want you to, I guess,
appreciate excitement good enough for me
as a monitoring tool of, um, how these things are run.
Thank you, Mr. Too. So
With difficulty.
Yeah. Okay. I mean, we observe, um, firstly, you know,
congratulations on your role being on
the board of te Thank you.
And what we've, what we've seen
and what we have observed is, um, Martin doing, um,
has taken a real leadership, um, role
and we can learn a lot from how they've done things
and the observations you've raised around sovereignty
and not really caring about what's happening elsewhere.
But knowing that this is really critical, I observed with,
um, great envy the work that was done by KU
because it's only il, you know,
it'd be nice if they did other languages too.
Um, looking at the Samoan language
and thinking that's a very complicated language.
Um, and I'd love for someone to do some work Mm.
In that space. And there might be someone
already doing that, I'm not sure.
But that's a really difficult, that's the,
that's the tension that we are trying to balance is one,
the resourcing to do that appropriately.
We're never gonna have that within the ministry.
That's why we do lean on the system
and what's being done, you know, globally
as a country in the public service space,
and hence the leaning on GCDO and the work that they do.
But yeah, regulating monitoring,
that's the tension that we have.
And we don't have the resourcing to do it at a level
that you are talking about, um, to give us assurance
that everything is done properly or appropriately.
We are leaning learning from others.
I won't say iterative, but,
but it's the reality given the priorities that we have, um,
and the resourcing that we have as a ministry.
Uh, thank you. Uh, we, we, we have a million questions,
but I think we'll just have to keep trucking through it.
Um, uh, Laura,
Oh, Hi guys.
Um, Morina, good morning.
Um, my question was more,
is probably following on from Helen.
Sorry, you've probably answered so many of these things now
'cause we're thinking constantly questions as you're going.
But, um, mine's more to do with the, the infrastructure, um,
because you talked about like needing, you know, like we,
with ai, we need more.
Like if we're gonna have sovereign ai,
we're gonna need big data centers
and energy to power that and all these kind of things.
Um, do you feel that we are like lagging
behind considering we don't even have any
of these projects like up and running, um, as a country?
So is that like a risk? Do you see that as a risk?
I mean, there are certainly, um, yes.
I mean, there are risks, absolutely.
But you know, in, in, in this, in this, um, environment, um,
there are some choices that we have and some that we don't.
Um, and so, you know,
I don't think we are ev ever gonna be leaving out the world
on, you know, having our own sovereign ai.
It's, it might be something that is cheaper
or more available in the future.
Um, but it is a, it is a case of following.
And, and, and the thing,
the reality is this is also a collective problem that kind
of needs to be approached collectively.
So that's why there's a lot of leaning on
what is happening in the EU and other jurisdictions
because, um, it's, it's quite hard for us to stand up to,
you know, some of these, um, for example, big AI companies
and say, oh, no, no, we're not gonna do it that way.
Because they can't just turn around
and say, oh, well, sorry, you can't have access to,
uh, AI here.
So, you know, it is, it is a difficult
environment to regulate.
Um, so yes, there's, there's definitely risks there.
Um, unfortunately I don't have all the answers,
but, um, no one does you, that is, that is, that is part
of the ongoing sort of, um, debate there, right. Ing
Thank you.
Um, awesome report. Well done.
Uh, really interested in, um,
like the copywriting aspect.
Actually, my, uh, copyright bill comes
up in the house tonight.
Um, just a little shout out for that.
Um, but, um, have you looked at, um,
the, that law that's come out of Denmark last year
around copy writing one's image?
Um, say that again, sorry.
So in Denmark last year, they passed this law to say
that everybody has a, a ownership of their own image,
so that ai, when they use it, actually
it goes against a copyright
that's already like, written into law.
There's, there's issues with it.
But, um, have you looked at that in terms
of like the changing the ever changing, um,
landscape of the digital world, Andre? Uh,
Yeah.
So we, we have considered that, um,
specifically the Denmark example, uh, under one
of the options around protecting, uh, users, um,
and consumers from DeepFakes and the misuse of ai.
And we actually called out that, that Denmark law
that you picked up as, as an example of, uh, something
that, that can be used.
The copyright space is evolving.
Um, we are seeing copyright cases in the US
and California and in the uk.
Uh, I don't think there's been a definitive
landmark ruling yet.
Uh, but it is an interesting space that we are close.
That's awesome. And so, um, I, I saw that you,
you referenced the Y 2 6 2, um, case in 2011,
and which is awesome.
Um, have you looked at the, um, abundant intelligences,
which is a group of, um, indigenous leaders around the world
who got like $25 million in funding
or something like this to actually dig into AI from
a global indigenous view?
And it particularly goes into, um, that data sovereignty,
holding data actually on your own, um, also
around communities,
because they're really interested in ensuring
that people keep up with, uh, the ever changing
like workplaces, especially for our young people.
Um, I didn't see it referenced, which, you know, there's
so much data, but that one I found really, really, um,
helpful because it crosses over, um, so many
different countries
and also got a massive chunk of money to do the research.
Thanks for drawing that to our attention.
We'll definitely be looking further into that example.
We did come across some, you know,
indigenous global projects, like local context,
which we're focused really in
that traditional knowledge label space.
Um, but we haven't, um, delved into that one, so thank you.
I'll add that to my to-do list.
Awesome. And one more question. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, this space of ai, you know,
there's a big balancing act that's going on, right?
Mm-hmm. Um, environment,
or that's another thing that was in that ai, um,
net environment, um,
copyright personal data.
And then there's also, um, the benefits obviously,
and I'm particularly thinking about the Phi
Kaha disabled community.
I know here in, um, parliament when we had big, um,
submissions in select committee, um, a lot
of disabled people can't access it immediately,
which they feel like is, um, cutting them out of a,
the democratic process.
It is available following day, um, but it is a disconnect.
And so have you, have you been working with as well around,
um, their thoughts, uh, and the community voice
Around, um, how it will support disabled people?
Um, sure. Um, we have been in touch, I believe,
through Amplify as well.
Um, looking at some things like the captioning, um,
particularly the develop digital developments in that space.
And we had the privilege of working with Arts Access
and they were closely involved in developing the briefing
so we could better understand the issues facing the disabled
community, both in terms of those, um, how to enhance
just the access to experiences.
Um, in the time that we wrote the LTI, um,
there's been a launch of a new technology,
New Zealand based startup car technologies has launched the
automated sign language, um, interpretation translation,
where you can enter something online
and it will immediately give you the signing.
Um, so there's, there's tools emerging all the time
to increase accessibility for our disabled community.
Um, and we're continuing to work with our agencies and,
and organizations connections in that space too.
Thank you for your time. Stay across that.
And, and even with the, we did have like a
easy summary for, for our, you know, communities that
can't read a big long term insights briefing.
So we did take a real considered approach
to not only developing a term inside the briefing,
but how we then make it accessible.
We love plain language. Thank you,
Jamie. Uh,
my, my question is along that lines of how,
how such a diverse sector, so
how do you relay this back to a sector?
And then how do you, uh, keep updating?
Because I've got feeling, uh,
if we wait till 2040, things have moved on.
So is that every couple of years you're gonna go back
to the sector and how are you gonna keep talking to
No, the, the, the sector engagement is ongoing.
Mm-hmm. We have ongoing relationships with from chairs
to chief executives to my colleagues here
that connect them at our operational level.
And so this is an ongoing conversation around trends
and how, um, AI, digital technology is being used.
Mm-hmm. I have a forum called the Cultural Agency Chief
Executives Forum, where we talk on real important issues.
And, you know, the, the, our tip was one of those
and encouraging them and their engagement in it.
So there's an ongoing conversation.
We're not waiting for, you know, a future time
to, to discuss this.
We also have a collaborative work program, um,
called TE Kahu
or Compass, which is our cultural system evidence framework.
And we communicate on a, um, roughly bimonthly basis
with our current entities and others
to work on sharing insights
and developing, um, new research together, um, to
address key priority gaps in our evidence base.
So we have a ongoing information sharing
relationships as well.
And that extends out to lots of our research active
and insights active organizations across the sectors.
Yeah. And then I just think just outside of the, sort
of the, the themselves, there's a, as you'd imagine,
the creative sector is full of people with ideas
and they're very keen to come and share them with us.
So they're, they're you, you know, the regular,
ongoing dialogue and,
and just, you know, some of the things they come up with,
you know, so the, the, so the, the good thing that we are,
we are blessed at the ministry to have sector of people
who are really committed for the very engaged
and thoughtful and very engaged
Like no other sector.
So our job, you know, developing advice is, is,
is helped in, in no small part by,
um, you know, we can talk that,
And that extends us into the tech sector as well.
So as part of the engagement
for our long term insights briefing,
we presented at the AI forums, um, creative Industry Summit,
which was held last year in Auckland and Wellington.
And we plan to continue those connections
to stay across those latest developments in this thing.
Lauren. Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, um, I don't wanna sound critical
of the whole AI thing, but I,
I read option 30, that AI driven referee decisions.
We're still talking about sport age
30, That option 30.
Oh, option three. Um, and it's things like that, um, that,
you know, you think when is too far, too far?
You know, when, when do we go too far that we've,
we've actually lost the human, um, input
because part of the engagement with sport,
and I think about how often I watch the Warriors
and AI driven referee just will rob me of the opportunity
to yell at the ref, but that's part
of the interaction we have with it as humans.
Yes. I just, I, I get concerned
that we're gonna surrender our humanness to a
and we're gonna lose that reality.
And it's the same in the creative sector. Mm-hmm.
You know, a lot of that creation, you know, they say it's
because you're connected to the creative.
Well, AI is not.
And so that creativity comes from a different place than ai.
So how do we make that balance?
This is the maturity of society with technology.
So as we mature as a society with AI coming
through all these things, you're saying,
nah, don't want that.
And so those are the considerations and the engagement.
And we've talked about this tension.
That is the tension, you know, um,
do we want perfect referees
that are artificially intelligent?
They can just do all of that stuff with no mistakes,
um, that's too far.
Interesting. Or, or, or, or they might have a bias
and allow the blues to win in rugby.
You know, you just don't know.
But that's the tension, Maureen.
Yes. Think. Oh,
Look, uh, I think, um,
though you have a hell of lot of, uh,
Additional questions, discussion,
It's a huge discussion. But
look, I wanna congratulate putting
in a very high quality piece.
Yeah, no, I think, um, I've done a lot of surfing
and so I think actually both things you said were true at
the start is the wave has washed over us
and waves have washed over us.
Just my view, uh, you know,
we all huge young people use social media, for example,
TikTok, Facebook, Instagram, et cetera, et cetera.
And this shapes the digital ecosystem
that we live in, think in.
Um, and we don't have control of those,
those international companies.
Another set of waves coming
and another set of waves are coming.
And so the question is how can we make sure we are
placing ourselves?
Mm-hmm. Well, for this waves, I think a lot of your,
your recommendations give some really good discussions.
I mean, we haven't even touched on things like a right
to reset or retrain
a digital technology transparency built on blockchain
counter for quantum computing.
There's a lot of really good material in here,
so just wanna congratulate on that.
And I think, uh, needs to be, uh,
a lot more conversation that is happening.
So I thank you on behalf of us for.